the advice you will most commonly
receive on what makes a language easy or
difficult to learn will resort to an
analytical comparison of how much or how
little the target language has in common
with your first language so if you're a
native speaker of English they'll talk
about how much or how little German has
in common with English how much are a
little French Spanish Portuguese this
whole way of thinking about difficulty
in language learning very quickly
becomes surreal absurd and pointless
when we're talking about Asian languages
and when I say Asia I don't just mean
East Asia so it is true for example that
the languages of India without exception
have powerful links etymologically
historically to the languages of Europe
you have a word like dental in English
dental dentistry sanskrit and pali both
have dontoh da n ta and this same word
or same root of a word then appears with
very slight phonetic differences in all
the modern languages of india including
even say tamil you know Dravidian
languages they will still have these as
loan words or what have you this kind of
vocabulary will have been incorporated
into all the languages of India one way
or another that word danta that we have
as dental it left across the ocean all
the way to Cambodia where it became Thea
right here's the problem this is
interesting and intellectually
stimulating in a sense that in in even
Cambodian and Lotion you have some words
with some sort of common ancestry
linking them to Europe you know linking
them to Latin and Latin related
languages but it doesn't make learning
the language easier if you are the kind
of person who finds that fascinating and
motivating then it may make it more into
but more interesting is not easier what
we're talking about this video is what
is it that would make learning a
language easier when we're looking at
some of the most difficult languages to
learn in the world right so there are
two lines of approach I want to briefly
describe in this video and they both
have nothing to do with the resemblance
to English or you know if you're
watching this if your first language is
Russian this has nothing to do with the
resemblance to Russian okay the first
thing to really think about is phonetic
distinctiveness in the language so what
I mean by this is how many phonetic
distinctions there are within that
language within the target language that
lets you discern discrete words that
lets you identify unique words as unique
when you are listening to the language
okay um and this also relates to how the
language is actually spoken in practice
not the theory of how the language is
written so Cambodian has a tremendous
variety of consonant sounds vowel sounds
and combined consonant sounds and
combined vowel sounds all right
Chinese has none of this right Chinese
you have very few vowel sounds very few
consonant sounds and then the the
consonants don't combine to make more
complex consonants the vowels don't
combine to make more complex vowels
maybe there's one exception in Chinese
to that
generally speaking Chinese is very
phonetically limited it's very
phonetically poor but if you listen to
Chinese in practice as it really is
spoken in language parole in practice
it's even worse because the Chinese
themselves do not make use of the
phonetic distinctions of the language
that exists on paper so you know I was
making a video recently and I had my own
voice at the computer voice and then I
had a clip from a Chinese movie and even
though they were speaking Chinese in the
movie so that the word question was ca
xu e so i'm here over pronouncing that
yeah like you know if if the word were
snow
you could you know you know pronounce it
the way the people in the movie actually
pronounced that word sounded more like
si uses she she like that's all this
they didn't even pronounce the X in
Chinese X is different from s they were
really just that's all you got
right so for your listening
comprehension you have to pick up on
that one syllable and it's not just that
the syllable itself is brief right it's
that it lacks phonetic distinctions from
many other words that it possibly could
be that your mind has to fill in okay
Japanese has a related but different
problem Japanese structurally and
aesthetically very much resembles Kree
in a jib way First Nations languages in
Canada so crea jib way and Japanese they
all have a pattern consonant vowel
consonant vowel constant available so
you almost never get a complex consonant
multiple continents combining complex
vowels multiple vowels combining just a
few vowel sounds just a few constant
sounds and then the words are long
strings of these consonant vowel
combinations so again mentally you have
to hear the whole word you have to
distinguish what is the ending of one
word and what's the beginning of the
next word and that is purely in your
imagination that's purely or disturbing
right in these types of languages nobody
tells you when one word ends the next
begins so when you're listening to
English right now if you heard a hear a
word like running you you're just
familiar enough with the structuring
that okay the inga sound will not be the
beginning of the next word that must be
the ending of one word and now on
listening for the beginning of the next
word very difficult to develop that with
languages like Chinese Cree in a giblet
right very different challenge different
from Chinese but again we're
fundamentally dealing with the problem
with phonetic distinctiveness all right
what you have to pick up on and again
with Japanese the difference between
textbook japanese clearly pronounced
japanese for textbooks and the way
people actually mumble that language
it's mind-blowing and and they do mumble
they do under pronounce under enunciate
and one of the
that is they don't want to sound
imposing or arrogance for them it's
polite for them to sort of under under
pronounce their own language very very
difficult for for listening operation
now by contrast I've mentioned Cambodian
so many distinct sort of harsh unique
sounds there are so many words where if
you've learned it once and then you hear
it from someone in any context you'll
immediately be able to recognize it to
my knowledge I would say a language like
a language like Turkish the Turkic
languages I like this a fair bit too if
you want to know what makes language
acquisition easier within the category
the hardest languages to learn in the
world this quality of being phonetically
distinctive and phonetically mnemonic
with a moment you hear a word you can
identify it you can remember it because
it's so phonetically unique that's a
quality that you could have in a
language where the words are generally
quite short Cambodian most words are
short not as not as brief as Chinese but
it's rare to get long words in Cambodian
in Japanese the words are very long so
on Turkish the Turkic languages sort of
intermediaries many words are short but
some are medium length they're long I
would say this is the one most
fundamental thing that will that will
help you as a foreigner develop
listening comprehension and listening
comprehension is the one thing that the
books the hard work and isolation can't
help you with it's really the biggest
struggle outside of the classroom when
you're away from from the the textbooks
from it's the part of language
acquisition you have the least control
over and that your efforts you know your
self-discipline your your brilliance
even your intelligence can help you with
the least so really keep that in mind I
think tonight and then the second
category of what will make a language
easier to learn or more difficult to
learn is sociolinguistic so based on
what I've just told you you would be
able to guess that Cambodian is an
easier language to learn that
loschen if we're talking about the
spoken language I would say yes
Cambodian - not including the aspect of
the the complexity of the writing system
I would say okay Cambodian has these
advantages and is easier to learn than
lotion however the sociolinguistic
attitude of the Cambodians is terrible
their attitude towards their own
language and how foreigners speak their
language and differences of accent and
intonation how helpful they are or how
punitive they are is a huge issue I new
skate I didn't know this person
personally I was within six degrees of
separation of a Korean girl who grew up
in Canada but she grew up speaking
Korean with her own parents and
grandparents and when she went to Korea
people there insulted her and reviled
her and called her they look
because she spoke Korean but she didn't
have the intonation quite correct she
didn't have the pronunciation but you
know she grew up in Canada with kind of
limited exposure to language she didn't
have it really accurate and in one case
she went into a shop thing was a grocery
store to buy some food and the owner of
the grocery store beat her with the
broom and chased her out of the shop
saying we don't want people like you in
here we don't want mentally disabled
people in whatever harsh term agreeing
okay so these sociolinguistic attitudes
towards an outsider learning the
language this is really negative okay
the arrogance and the punitive quality
of Cambodian culture and their negative
attitudes towards book-learning their
negative attitudes towards talking to
outsiders at all I mean there are many
many different ways in which learning
the Cambodian language is made much
worse because of sociolinguistic
attitudes in Cambodian their total
unwillingness as a culture to listen to
you if you say a word just slightly
incorrectly and again it's not even
incorrectly you say a word in a manner
slightly different from the way their
own family would say it because like
Cambodia there's some phonetic
flexibility here it's mind-blowing how
awful it is learning Cambodian dealing
with other Cambodian people face to face
there
we'll be helpful to you and they won't
think ok you're saying that so oh oh oh
you must mean this and they won't help
you and correct you now for me as a
native speaker of English I'm real and I
grew up in Toronto which is full of
immigrants from around the world I have
to be prepared to hear the way English
is mispronounced not just by new
immigrants because there's unbelievable
phonetic diversity just within England
within the British Isles really just
within England I was listening to a
podcast the other day that a guy from
northern England mind-blowing to me how
he how he print even simple words like
don't was mind-blowing to me that we did
I don't want to don't know you know we
he didn't know his pronunciation of the
phonetic sequence don't know I was just
like wow you know anyone can understand
this guy out of his small town in
England wherever he grew up you know
with this with this accident we have to
be prepared for tremendous flexibility
and listening comprehension with English
if you're a native English speaker some
of these cultures like Cambodia the
Cambodian they don't have that at all
and those sociolinguistic factors make
it much much much more difficult to
learn the language
Laos Laos is next door to Cambodia these
are adjacent countries in Southeast Asia
ok
but in Laos they have something like 48
official ethnic minority languages maybe
they've increased it to 52
they are extremely practiced at coping
with hearing their own language spoken
poorly spoken with an accent spoken
across language and cultural barriers
even within their country and they're
really used to dialect difference in
accent difference from people who speak
loshon from different backgrounds in
that immediate area right to a wonderful
scent and they have very positive very
supportive attitudes towards you know
the small but so difficult to negotiate
differences in pronunciation do you need
to deal with face to face I remember I
was I was eating food once and I refused
to eat any more food saying Paul L K and
Lao so Paul Paul
they'll and a guy at the table he wasn't
mean but he pointed out he said the way
you're pronouncing that it doesn't sound
like you're saying I have enough already
it sounds like you're saying I am a
father already this is like the phonetic
difference between like paw and my paw
there's some incredibly small phonetic
difference but they were being helpful
they understood what I meant they were
able to guess what kind they were
willing to make that effort to listen to
you and figure out what you meant to say
even if you weren't quite saying it
correctly
specifically with Taiwan and Hong Kong
sociolinguistic attitudes towards
learning Chinese are terrible I don't
want this video to be too long it's not
going to get into it this the the
sociolinguistic attitudes of Chinese
people towards learning towards
foreigners learning Chinese are
abominable they're awful and and frankly
you should resent it and the attitudes
of people who are bilingual people who
speak both English and Chinese here on
the internet are absolutely terrible
they're 0 out of 10 in fact that one
issue alone the difference in
sociolinguistic attitudes that could be
a reason to learn Japanese instead of
Chinese if you were picking between two
of them just as as I said before it
certainly would be a powerful reason to
learn lotion rather than Cambodian now
China is a huge country
I'm not going to generalize too much
about that because you know I don't
think sociolinguistic attitudes would be
the same in Beijing as they are in
Kunming or in the Donbas as they are in
Tibet
you know huge diversity of places you
could be living and working in China
however I've got to tell you all of the
all of the cases I'm familiar with
within China culture by culture province
by province there are different degrees
of bad and awful some are a little bit
better have a little bit more positive
attitudes towards I'm shining if you
guys are having trouble visualize what
I'm talking about here think about the
famous attitude of the French the French
are changing now the French are becoming
less awful about their own language but
you know that the French in France such
bastards such
so so punitive and cruel towards people
who are making a sincere effort to learn
their language and speak their language
well of course this partly comes out of
colonialism it's partly the way they
treat North African immigrants you know
but it's the way they treat someone from
Germany from Canada from America anyone
who's really trying to communicate in
French and they're just punitive and not
helpful it's like oh well if you don't
already speak French absolutely
perfectly they're gonna treat you like
garbage and in general Germans are not
like that Germans Germans have basically
okay attitudes towards learning their
language I think if you were learning a
language like Danish or Czech or
Norwegian I think in those countries
probably people would have very positive
social English dekai to do is partly
they'd be happy that a foreigner is
making the effort to learn their
language you'd have to see I don't I
don't have that much experience with
those other languages have been to the
Czech Republic you know again Greek we
were just in Greece recently struggling
to study and speak a little bit of Greek
this question of how supportive how
understanding social linguistic
attitudes are it's very very very
important and it also entails choices
you can make as a language learner you
may not have the option to choose
between learning Chinese versus Japanese
or to choose between learning Greek
versus learning French right but you may
be able to make a strategic decision of
where you learn the language so to give
an example if you choose to learn French
in Quebec Quebec is within Canada
totally different attitude towards
learning French like the the
sociolinguistic attitudes completely
different from learning French in Paris
or in the South of France or within
continental France or what have you and
again you could look at it depart mo buy
depart mo you could look at all the
overseas French territories and former
colonies quite possibly you could have a
really positive experience learning
French in Africa
all right that's a totally different
game so likewise with learning Chinese
if you're really aware of these factors
both the phonetic Factor
of how Chinese is really spoken and the
social linguistic attitude you could
look carefully at all the different
options of where to learn Chinese around
the world you know there are a lot of
people who speak Chinese in California I
don't recommend I don't recommend
learning Chinese in Los Angeles but
maybe whether you're looking at
Singapore Hong Kong Taiwan you know Dom
Bay within mainland China
you know the far north the far south the
far theses forwards when you look at it
province by province and dialect by
dialect maybe you can make a more
informed choice for how to make learning
any of these extraordinarily difficult
languages the easiest for you back when
I was learning Japanese I did that
research and I decided to learn Japanese
in in quite a small town in the far
south of Japan where I knew there
wouldn't be foreigners and I knew there
wouldn't be hostile attitudes towards
foreigners where I thought I would
encounter better sociolinguistic
attitudes even though the accent spoken
there was very fundamentally different
from the accent spoken in Tokyo on
television on the radio do the research
reap the rewards make the decisions live
with the consequences it is all up to
you